README.md, before:

# Vanilla JavaScript

## What is "Vanilla" JavaScript

Basics (always part of javascript)

- Basics: map, find, filter, reduce, if, var
- Write everything yourself (no framework or libries)
- Frontend JavaScript (frontend), NodeJS (backend)
- DOM -> Document Object Model

## Usecases

No unnecessary JavaScript

- You do not want to rely on any dependencies
- Optimize the size of your the code you send
- 3rd party -> integrate a little script on someone site
- Simplify (do some simple things like an animation)
- You are using a server framework that does most of the heavy lifting (Ruby on Rails, .NET C#), Not building a SPA
- You want to combine a little vanilla with a JS framework you are using

When to avoid Vanilla JavaScript

- A framework is already being used -> use the framework
- You are building a complex app (will be become hard to maintain)
- It costs a lot of time to do JavaScript

Balance: Dev time & Run time

## Differences with React

React

- data -> render the components
- user action -> change the underlying data -> rerender the components (react does this for you)

```js
const [show, setShow] = useState(false);

return (
  <div>
    <button onClick={() => setShow(true)}>Click me</button>
    {show === true ? "I am Visable" : null}
  </div>
);
```

Vanilla

- data is stored in the HTML itself, instead of state or props
- If you want to page:
- select the element you want to change -> change it
- Direct manipulation of the page, not the underlying data
- State is kept in the HTML elements

```js
const element = document.getElementById("somethingHidden");

element.style.display = "none";

function show() {
  element.style.display = "block";
}

<button onClick="show()"></button>;
```

## Common strategies & DOM Methods

- Select element(s) on the page -> manipulate them by reassigning property

```html
<html>
  <h1 id="somethingToBeRemoved">I am visable</h1>
</html>
```

```javascript
const element = document.getElementById("somethingToBeRemoved");
element.style.display = "block";
```

- Select element(s) on the page -> call some method on the element

```javascript
const element = document.getElementById("somethingToBeRemoved");
element.remove();
```

- Create new Elements and put them on the page

```javascript
const list = document.getElementById("myList");

// add a new item to the list

// creating the item
const listItem = document.createElement("li");
// setting the content of the item
li.innerText = "I need to explain Vanilla";

// put it on the page
list.appendChild(listItem);
```

- Adding event listeners to elements

```javascript
const button = document.getElementById("myButton");

button.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
  button.style.color = "red";
  // now the button text is red
});
```

## Making a simple app

Todo List

- [x] As a user I want to see the things I have to do
- [x] As a user I want to check items on my todoList
  - Linethrough when checked
  - [x] Onclick -> added event listener to each checkbox
  - [x] Some way of selecting the item we want to change (parentElement)
  - [x] Change the style of the todoitem
- As a user I want to clear any items on my list that are done
  - [x] a button
  - [x] event listener on the button
  - [x] event handler
  - [x] select items which items are done
  - [x] remove them
- As a user I want to add new todo items to my list
  - [x] input field
  - [x] button
  - [x] event listener
  - [x] event handler
  - [x] get the value of the inputfield
  - [x] add new item to the list
    - createElement
    - appendChild (add the element we created to the list)

## Exercise - build vanilla JS api explorer

See design

![Api explorer](./api-explorer.png)

- User puts in a url -> click "Explore"
- Print out the JSON and the status code

- How to make request with vanilla javascript
- window.fetch() ->

Hint 1:

```javascript
async function getUserAsync(name) {
  let response = await fetch(`https://api.github.com/users/${name}`);
  let data = await response.json();

  // put elements on the page, select, change properties, create elements
}
```

Hint 2:

If you want to format JSON, consider using

- a `<pre>` element
- JSON.stringify({ hello: 'hello'}, null, 4)

## Day 2

- Investigate: Why does my clear button not clear all the items :(
- Some more "modern" vanilla methods
  - document.querySelector() / document.querySelectorAll() -> css selector, and use forEach
  - html templates
- The idea of initializing our JavaScript (where to put our script)
  - async an external script
  - DOMContentLoaded to wait for interactive JavaScript that needs the page to have been loaded
- What is the DOM actually?? -> HTML Programming Interface
- V2 api explorer

Diagnosis

- [x] Does my function run? -> put in a log
- [x] Go line by line, verify that each line works as intended

  - Make a log with the output of a piece of code
  - Make predictions of what you are going to see -> test your understanding, you might not spot the bug otherwise
  - Verify your prediction was correct (run the code)

- Problem: length of the collection was getting changed halfway through the loop

How the web works

1. User opens their browser
2. Go to the adress bar
3. Put in a url
4. Click enter

5. Request -> where does the request go? -> some server
6. Get the ip adress of the server from the DNS system
7. Our request sent to the right server
8. Sends a response -> a HTML file

9. Now we have an HTML file (text)
10. The browser "parses" the HTML -> The DOM (Document Object Model)
11. The DOM is html text (tags -> `<html></html>`) translated into HTML Elements, which are stored in memory
12. These HTML Elements are like JavaScript Objects
13. You can change the HTML elements (which are like objects) through JavaScript
14. That way you can change the content on the page

![api-explorer-v2](api-explorer-v2.png)

## Day 3

- classList -> classList.add classList.toggle
  - navbar -> mobileNavbar & mobileNavbar--open
- Writing code into different files -> module system (8% compatibility loss)
- A build process
  - Webpack
    - JS files (src) -> 1 JS file (bundle / build)
    - Sass -> sass files -> 1 css file
    - Babel (Transpiler) -> JS Files "modern javascript" -> JS Files "backward compatible javascript"
- Seperating things into functions

## Webpack

Build tool

- bundles javascript into 1 file
- uglifies and minifies the code
- works with many plugins (sass, images, babel, typescript)
- dev server, watch (similar to live server)
- can use zero config mode: webpack
- At lot the time you need a webpack.config.js -> install plugins

Builds

- optimized versions for running the browser
  - as small possible
  - as few files possible
  - make them compatible with older browser -> by using babel

2 sets of JS

- src -> source code -> src folder
- bundle -> build -> dist folder (distribution) / build folder (finished)

## Day 4

Persisting

- GET todos
  - [x] Delete placeholder todos from the HTML
  - [x] Store todos on the server side -> file -> come up with a format?
  - [x] Make a route on the server to GET /
  - [x] The route responds with JSON when you make request
  - [ ] Make a request from the client side
  - [ ] Render the todos in the DOM
- POST todos -> New todo
- DELETE todos -> Delete All Done
- PATCH todos -> Done / Not Done

Commit message:

Make it possible to render done elements

README.md, after:

# Vanilla JavaScript

## What is "Vanilla" JavaScript

Basics (always part of javascript)

- Basics: map, find, filter, reduce, if, var
- Write everything yourself (no framework or libries)
- Frontend JavaScript (frontend), NodeJS (backend)
- DOM -> Document Object Model

## Usecases

No unnecessary JavaScript

- You do not want to rely on any dependencies
- Optimize the size of your the code you send
- 3rd party -> integrate a little script on someone site
- Simplify (do some simple things like an animation)
- You are using a server framework that does most of the heavy lifting (Ruby on Rails, .NET C#), Not building a SPA
- You want to combine a little vanilla with a JS framework you are using

When to avoid Vanilla JavaScript

- A framework is already being used -> use the framework
- You are building a complex app (will be become hard to maintain)
- It costs a lot of time to do JavaScript

Balance: Dev time & Run time

## Differences with React

React

- data -> render the components
- user action -> change the underlying data -> rerender the components (react does this for you)

```js
const [show, setShow] = useState(false);

return (
  <div>
    <button onClick={() => setShow(true)}>Click me</button>
    {show === true ? "I am Visable" : null}
  </div>
);
```

Vanilla

- data is stored in the HTML itself, instead of state or props
- If you want to page:
- select the element you want to change -> change it
- Direct manipulation of the page, not the underlying data
- State is kept in the HTML elements

```js
const element = document.getElementById("somethingHidden");

element.style.display = "none";

function show() {
  element.style.display = "block";
}

<button onClick="show()"></button>;
```

## Common strategies & DOM Methods

- Select element(s) on the page -> manipulate them by reassigning property

```html
<html>
  <h1 id="somethingToBeRemoved">I am visable</h1>
</html>
```

```javascript
const element = document.getElementById("somethingToBeRemoved");
element.style.display = "block";
```

- Select element(s) on the page -> call some method on the element

```javascript
const element = document.getElementById("somethingToBeRemoved");
element.remove();
```

- Create new Elements and put them on the page

```javascript
const list = document.getElementById("myList");

// add a new item to the list

// creating the item
const listItem = document.createElement("li");
// setting the content of the item
li.innerText = "I need to explain Vanilla";

// put it on the page
list.appendChild(listItem);
```

- Adding event listeners to elements

```javascript
const button = document.getElementById("myButton");

button.addEventListener("click", (event) => {
  button.style.color = "red";
  // now the button text is red
});
```

## Making a simple app

Todo List

- [x] As a user I want to see the things I have to do
- [x] As a user I want to check items on my todoList
  - Linethrough when checked
  - [x] Onclick -> added event listener to each checkbox
  - [x] Some way of selecting the item we want to change (parentElement)
  - [x] Change the style of the todoitem
- As a user I want to clear any items on my list that are done
  - [x] a button
  - [x] event listener on the button
  - [x] event handler
  - [x] select items which items are done
  - [x] remove them
- As a user I want to add new todo items to my list
  - [x] input field
  - [x] button
  - [x] event listener
  - [x] event handler
  - [x] get the value of the inputfield
  - [x] add new item to the list
    - createElement
    - appendChild (add the element we created to the list)

## Exercise - build vanilla JS api explorer

See design

![Api explorer](./api-explorer.png)

- User puts in a url -> click "Explore"
- Print out the JSON and the status code

- How to make request with vanilla javascript
- window.fetch() ->

Hint 1:

```javascript
async function getUserAsync(name) {
  let response = await fetch(`https://api.github.com/users/${name}`);
  let data = await response.json();

  // put elements on the page, select, change properties, create elements
}
```

Hint 2:

If you want to format JSON, consider using

- a `<pre>` element
- JSON.stringify({ hello: 'hello'}, null, 4)

## Day 2

- Investigate: Why does my clear button not clear all the items :(
- Some more "modern" vanilla methods
  - document.querySelector() / document.querySelectorAll() -> css selector, and use forEach
  - html templates
- The idea of initializing our JavaScript (where to put our script)
  - async an external script
  - DOMContentLoaded to wait for interactive JavaScript that needs the page to have been loaded
- What is the DOM actually?? -> HTML Programming Interface
- V2 api explorer

Diagnosis

- [x] Does my function run? -> put in a log
- [x] Go line by line, verify that each line works as intended

  - Make a log with the output of a piece of code
  - Make predictions of what you are going to see -> test your understanding, you might not spot the bug otherwise
  - Verify your prediction was correct (run the code)

- Problem: length of the collection was getting changed halfway through the loop

How the web works

1. User opens their browser
2. Go to the adress bar
3. Put in a url
4. Click enter

5. Request -> where does the request go? -> some server
6. Get the ip adress of the server from the DNS system
7. Our request sent to the right server
8. Sends a response -> a HTML file

9. Now we have an HTML file (text)
10. The browser "parses" the HTML -> The DOM (Document Object Model)
11. The DOM is html text (tags -> `<html></html>`) translated into HTML Elements, which are stored in memory
12. These HTML Elements are like JavaScript Objects
13. You can change the HTML elements (which are like objects) through JavaScript
14. That way you can change the content on the page

![api-explorer-v2](api-explorer-v2.png)

## Day 3

- classList -> classList.add classList.toggle
  - navbar -> mobileNavbar & mobileNavbar--open
- Writing code into different files -> module system (8% compatibility loss)
- A build process
  - Webpack
    - JS files (src) -> 1 JS file (bundle / build)
    - Sass -> sass files -> 1 css file
    - Babel (Transpiler) -> JS Files "modern javascript" -> JS Files "backward compatible javascript"
- Seperating things into functions

## Webpack

Build tool

- bundles javascript into 1 file
- uglifies and minifies the code
- works with many plugins (sass, images, babel, typescript)
- dev server, watch (similar to live server)
- can use zero config mode: webpack
- At lot the time you need a webpack.config.js -> install plugins

Builds

- optimized versions for running the browser
  - as small possible
  - as few files possible
  - make them compatible with older browser -> by using babel

2 sets of JS

- src -> source code -> src folder
- bundle -> build -> dist folder (distribution) / build folder (finished)

## Day 4

Persisting

- GET todos
  - [x] Delete placeholder todos from the HTML
  - [x] Store todos on the server side -> file -> come up with a format?
  - [x] Make a route on the server to GET /
  - [x] The route responds with JSON when you make request
  - [x] Make a request from the client side
  - [x] Render the todos in the DOM
  - [ ] Make it possible to render a todo that is done already
- POST todos -> New todo
- DELETE todos -> Delete All Done
- PATCH todos -> Done / Not Done
